[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>MICHAEL JAWER: So
way back in the 1990s,
I was working in the commercial
real estate industry.
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
Well that sounds
like a natural segue to the
"Sensitive Soul" author.
>>JAWER: Sure.
A feeling went up the spine
like this is just not ordinary.
>>REGINA: Not normal, yeah.
>>JAWER: But it is very human.
One example might actually
be Greta Thunberg.
She went into this
depression then
she came out this crusader.
So that these kinds
of experiences,
which are traumatic,
have a resonance to them.
>>REGINA: I mean
with someone who's
five to give a 20-minute
discourse on the nature of God
and man, it would certainly
seem it's not coming
from his personal experience.
>>JAWER: They are dissociating
from their own day-to-day
experience.
And the question is
what are they accessing?
>>REGINA: Today's
guest, Michael Jawer,
is saying some of us
are more thin-walled
and others more thick-walled.
What does this mean?
It means that we have different
levels of sensitivity,
which has implications
for each one of us.
For example a
thin-walled person might
be overly sensitive to pretty
much everything emotionally.
But it may be opened up on
more sublime connection levels.
And that's kind of where we're
going to go in the conversation
is everywhere in between.
Welcome, Michael.
>>JAWER: It's a pleasure
to be here, Regina.
>>REGINA: And the book's
called "Sensitive Soul."
>>JAWER: Yes.
>>REGINA: And so we're
going to spend a lot of time
on anecdotes because the
book is loaded with them
and people love anecdotes.
So before we go there,
let's first of all,
let everybody get
to know you a bit
and let them get to know you a
bit in terms of your background
in terms of both psychological
and paranormal research,
so they'll know where
you're coming from.
>>JAWER: Sure.
Well I never really expected
to delve into the subject
that we're going to be talking
about, but going back--
>>REGINA: Well
how did it happen?
>>JAWER: So about 25 years
ago, way back in the 1990s,
I was actually working in the
commercial real estate industry
representing a commercial
building owners and managers--
>>REGINA: Well that sounds
like a natural segue
to the "Sensitive Soul" author.
>>JAWER: Well it's interesting.
There is a straight
line going back.
So I was representing
this organization
and working with the
Environmental Protection
Agency, because there's
something called sick building
syndrome that occasionally
people read about.
And it's when a building becomes
unhealthy for people to be in
or, at the very least, there's
certain people in the building
that don't work in the
building very well because they
feel sick.
And then they go
out of the building
and they feel much better.
So the question is how do you
prevent sick building syndrome?
And how do you assist
the property managers
and the engineers to take care
of it if problems do arise?
And that's what
I was working on.
And in researching this
and in developing guidance
that the building owners and
managers could put to use,
I was talking to
people who'd been
affected by poor indoor air
and so-called sick buildings.
And some of them
related to me that they
had been super
sensitive to things
preceding this
particular environment
situation in the building.
And some of them said they
were sensitive to electricity,
to smells.
And some said that they
had anomalous or paranormal
sensitivities.
I never thought,
Regina, that I would
be hearing this kind of
information from folks.
But I'm grateful because I think
they confided in me as they
understood that this was a
project to try to improve
the environment of buildings.
And we got to
talking and I began
to wonder whether
sensitivity as a phenomenon
is just different
for different people.
That certain people
are more sensitive
for various and sundry reasons
in any particular situation.
And a so-called
sick building just
sort of prompts them
in a particular way
and becomes a manifest
difficulty for them.
So that's really what
drew me into this.
And I had a preexisting
interest in anomalous phenomena.
I'd had a couple of
experiences myself.
>>REGINA: I want to hear about
this before we go too far.
>>JAWER: Sure.
And within my family,
there's sort of lore,
especially on my mom's
side of the family,
of some psychical
abilities maybe
or just incidents that happened.
So I've always had kind of
a side interest in this.
So when folks confided
in me, I thought, well,
this is interesting.
Maybe I can explore
this a little further
and see what happens.
So since then, the
past 25 years or so,
I've been conducting sort of my
own independent investigation
talking to lots of
different people,
conducting a wide ranging
survey into a different forms
of sensitivity, and
compiling results,
and trying to be skeptical along
the way, trying to really hold
up to scrutiny what
people tell me,
and try to figure
out sort of nature
and nurture mix that
accounts for different types
of sensitivities, including
the extraordinary ones that are
described in this latest book.
>>REGINA: Right.
And we'll get into all kinds
of possibilities there.
It's up to each
person to see what
it is they feel they relate to.
But first of all, I want to
know about your own experience,
anomalous experiences.
What happened?
>>JAWER: Well a couple of really
interesting situations, really
out of left field.
And I can't say that it's a
recurring theme in my life,
but just happened
a couple of times
and gets you to wondering.
So one example is
after my grandfather
died, my mom's father, we
had a family gathering.
It was Thanksgiving
or Passover, I
don't remember
quite which but it
was within a few
months of his passing.
And at the end of the
meal, we were remembering
people, specifically him, who
weren't at the table that year,
who had obviously joined
us all previous years.
And within a few seconds
of mentioning his name,
there was a knocking
from the wall, maybe
about six or eight feet away
from where I was sitting.
And everyone was sitting
around the table.
The only person
who wasn't sitting
around the table
at that moment was
my mom who was in the kitchen.
So it was anomalous.
It just came out of nowhere.
And I remember my cousin
at the time saying,
after a few seconds of complete
silence, he said, "Wooo."
And that's basically what you
say in a situation like that.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>JAWER: But that
kind of stuck with me
because it was just so odd.
Another example is a number of
years later, I'm in my mid 20s
at this point, I was
living on my "bachelor
pad" in suburban D.C.
and my cat was with me.
We were close companions.
His name was Dalton.
And I regarded him as the
George Clooney of cats,
because he was just
dashing, and debonair,
and handsome, and intelligent.
And he wasn't scared
at all of anything.
One evening, I think it was
a Saturday or Sunday night,
about 1 o'clock in the morning,
I was just listening to--
I think I was just
listening to the radio.
And Dalton was on the bed and
dashed under the bed, which
he never did.
Never.
And moments after he
dashed under the bed--
I thought that was odd--
I felt what I can only
describe as a presence,
again, a few feet away from
me at the foot of the bed.
And it was palpable.
And I didn't know
what to make of it.
It felt uncomfortable.
I decided to ease
the discomfort.
I would put my Walkman on
and listen to some music
and sing along with it
and that calmed me down.
I looked at the clock,
wondered how long
is this going to continue.
At about 1:30, I noticed
that presence had dissipated.
The feeling was no longer there.
Out comes Dalton
from under the bed.
That never happened.
>>REGINA: Did you
have any sense of who
the being might have been?
>>JAWER: I don't know
if it's a who or what.
>>REGINA: Or a what.
>>JAWER: I had no,
no, sense other than--
>>REGINA: Some presence.
>>JAWER: It was something
that almost felt palpable.
>>REGINA: So where do you
fall on the sensitivity scale?
And we're going to talk about
a little self-test in a bit
that people can
take to kind of see
where they fall on your scale.
So where do you
fall on that scale?
>>JAWER: I'm actually on the
thick side of the spectrum.
As my wife can tell you,
I'm fairly thick at times.
>>REGINA: And yet you
are sensitive enough
that you could feel
this kind of presence.
>>JAWER: Yes, that seems to
be an aspect of sensitivity.
And I can say that the--
we'll talk more about
the boundary concept
of thick and thin boundaries,
but the guy who developed
it, Ernest Hartmann,
the late Ernest Hartmann
from Tufts University.
The original boundary
questionnaire
actually has 145 questions and
12 subscales or categories.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
Yours is much shorter.
>>JAWER: Unusual experiences
is one of those 12 categories.
So it's possible to be
overall thick or overall thin
but scored differently
in the subcategories.
>>REGINA: That makes sense.
>>JAWER: I'm probably--
>>REGINA: I would
have found that, too--
because my husband and
I both took the test.
And we were both kind of
surprised at the results
and realized those subcategories
probably would explain it.
OK.
Let's go into what
the boundaries are
and what thin wall and
thick wall constitute.
>>JAWER: Yeah.
So the idea is that
everyone is somewhere along
the spectrum from
extremely thick boundary
to extremely thin boundary.
An extremely thick
boundary person
is someone who is sort
of stoic, doesn't really
understand what they're
feeling at any given moment.
Dreams in black and white,
has sort of pedestrian dreams.
Doesn't really give a whole lot
of credence to what they dream.
It's not a big deal for them.
Is highly organized,
kind of disciplined,
sees the world in
black and white.
Whereas a highly thin
boundary person is precisely
the opposite.
They see all kinds
of shades of gray.
They're very reactive.
They're very concerned
about emotion.
They react viscerally to things.
Stuff that happened to
them a long time ago,
it's almost still in the
present day for them.
They can recollect
things very clearly.
And they also have very
colorful memorable dreams.
And then there's everybody,
all grades in between.
So it's just an interesting
way to look at people.
And my particular
interest, Regina,
is really how it
relates to feelings
and how closely identified
people are with their feelings.
Because I think that's a
kind of overlooked aspect
and a very fundamental aspect of
how we operate as human beings.
People don't all
operate the same way,
and feelings have a strong,
definite power to them.
And I think that
also lends itself
to studying some of these
anomalous circumstances.
>>REGINA: OK.
So now this gets into
a question that's
one of my favorite topics.
And that is kind
of breaking down
the difference between
emotions and feelings,
because oftentimes they're
perceived quite differently.
For myself, I'll just say
I've always perceived feelings
as something that inform.
It's more of some information
coming in that you
can choose to react to or not.
But it's information.
It's informing, where
it seems that emotions
are often reactive, reactive.
And so I'm going to give
you a little example
so you can tell me
what would be going on,
because we're talking about
the sensitivity thing.
And as you were talking, this
memory popped back to mind.
So my son who was
quite sensitive--
and I'm pretty sensitive
so it would seem--
went to a friend's
house for dinner.
And he comes up.
And he's 12 years old.
He's kind of tugging
to get my attention,
because he's doing his homework.
And it's actually a
ladies dinner, right?
And he said, mom, can
we get out of here?
And I said, what's up, honey?
And he said, look at
the color of the walls.
I said, I know, it's awful.
It's really hard.
And I understood
exactly what he meant.
And both of us
have a sensitivity
going into people's
spaces, because oftentimes
the light, and the colors,
and the way the lighting is
and all that are just
really harsh or not right.
Something's off in them.
So that's a feeling it seems,
although his response became
emotional.
You see what I'm saying?
>>JAWER: Yes, yes.
And I should say that
what you're describing
was summed up by
a series of books
actually by a woman
named Elaine Aron.
>>REGINA: Oh.
>>JAWER: "The Highly
Sensitive Person"
is the name of her series
of books and website.
And that's where I learned a
lot about different aspects
of being highly sensitive.
She's out in the West Coast.
And so what you're describing
is fairly typical for highly
sensitive people.
They react to all kinds of
things in the environment.
So you're right.
The feeling is a reaction.
Now people define feelings
and emotions differently.
There are neuroscientists
who describe it
in very different
ways than I would.
But I agree with
you that the feeling
is something that's internal.
>>REGINA: Yeah, it's kind
of information coming in.
>>JAWER: Correct, correct.
And it's an assessment,
really, of--
>>REGINA: An assessment,
that's right.
>>JAWER: --how you're
feeling, how you're doing
in that particular situation.
So feelings are
essential to being human.
If we weren't feeling creatures,
we would be zombies or robots,
and that would be no fun.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>JAWER: The emotions, as
the word suggests, to emote
is to express a feeling.
And people differ in that
way along that scale.
Also some people are much
more emotive and some less so.
And again, the thick to
thin boundary spectrum
gets to that aspect of
people's reactivity.
>>REGINA: So would people
who are, say, more sensitive
be more reactive?
>>JAWER: Yes, very much so.
>>REGINA: OK.
Even if they don't express
it, because you have
extroverts and introverts, and
you get into that whole thing.
So they may not express
it, but they're definitely
reacting to it.
>>JAWER: That's
absolutely right.
>>REGINA: OK.
So I think who you're
talking to right now,
our audience is probably going
to be very much thin-walled
dominant, just so you know.
>>JAWER: Well that's a big part
of my audience over the years,
sure.
>>REGINA: That's
what I'm saying.
Yeah, I think you've
got your audience here.
OK.
Let's talk about the
notion, because we
want to segue into
the notion of some
of these anomalous or
paranormal experiences.
And you say that exceptional
abilities in humans
are more a matter of extended
and connected empathy
rather than, say, what
we know as telepathy.
Tell us what that means.
>>JAWER: Well we're
empathizing or we ought
to be all the time with people.
I mean that's what makes
the world go around.
What I sort of set out in this
latest book "Sensitive Soul" is
that there's a variety of
conditions and capabilities
that people have that are
conditioned to a greater
extent, influenced
to a greater extent,
by their mode of feeling,
by the way that they feel
and their preponderance
to express themselves,
and the combination of nature
and nurture that sort of
makes them that way.
So I look at conditions
like autism, synesthesia,
which is overlapping
senses like feeling a shape
or tasting a color.
People think this is kind
of crazy, but it's a thing.
Some people are wired that way.
They come into the
world that way.
It's--
>>REGINA: Like a
crossover of senses.
>>JAWER: Crossover of senses.
And for some people, it's
just the way they are.
And they think that's
the way everybody
is until they get
to a certain age
and realize they're
in the minority.
Savontism, which is having
a particular amazing skill
but having some particular
limitations mentally
and emotionally as well.
These are all examples
of people who have
unique emotional processing.
But interestingly, I
should mention, Regina,
that thick boundary
people have a role
in anomalous occurrences also.
They might actually be more
responsible for getting
them started, whereas it's the
thin boundary people who are
more likely to apprehend them.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>JAWER: It's my
suspicion anyway.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
that's interesting.
Givers, receivers, same
thing when you're even
talking more kind
of telepathically
of people who can
receive easier and others
who can send out an
impression more successfully.
So we need to first take a
look at the role of trauma
in all of it.
Let's look at how
trauma plays a role.
Because there was
one thing you wrote
in your book that was
interesting about a soldier
that you are saying that
how a soldier reacts
in the field, which is under
extreme pressure, may be more
a result of childhood
trauma than what's actually
occurring in the moment.
So just as an example, give
us an idea of what that means.
>>JAWER: Well I
guess I would first
say that it might be helpful
for folks to picture feelings
as like water.
The feelings have
an energy to them.
And we get a sense for
that by the word "emotion."
When you emote, you have a sense
of feelings flowing outward,
or you should.
And people differ day to day.
You could be having
a great day and say
I'm really feeling up today.
And you can just feel
happier and more expansive.
Whereas other days,
you feel down.
And you sort of
feel constricted.
I'm just down today.
I don't know and in the
doldrums, that kind of thing.
So feelings really have an
impetus or an energy to them.
And I think that's
important to note,
because in traumatic
situations--
and highly sensitive
people are probably
more likely to react and feel
that something is traumatic
or it becomes
traumatic for them,
because they're more reactive.
But the key to
weathering trauma is
to identifying what's
going on and then
being able, ultimately, to emote
and to reconcile the situation
and your reaction to it.
The difficulty is that, for some
people, it can be overwhelming.
And based on where they are
on the boundary spectrum,
it may prove to be
a problem later on.
And I guess the
perfect example is
PTSD, which is one
of the conditions
that I address in the book.
Most people think
of PTSD as being
sort of a flashbulb memory.
People have an immediate
reaction when a car backfires,
and they're back on the
battlefield in Iraq, let's say.
And they're flooded by the sense
that they had at that moment.
So that's the popular
conception of PTSD.
And it tends to be that
way for most people
that suffer from PTSD.
But anywhere from 15%-30% of
folks who suffer from PTSD
experience it differently.
So that there is
a prompt, but they
don't get the immediate
visceral reaction of it.
Their form is more
dissociated form of PTSD.
In other words, they're not
feeling their feelings so much.
And they're just sort of
depressed and not sure.
They're walking
through pea soup.
They just don't know
really what's the matter.
So it really speaks to the
way the trauma plays out
with different people.
And people's
predilection for trauma,
obviously, has something to do
with their innate sensitivity
at the time that occurrence
happens, to what extent
they're overwhelmed
or to what extent
they're able to fathom
what's happening
and to react to it productively.
>>REGINA: And it
seems like what you're
saying in the book
is that trauma often
is at the base of people
who are displaying
exceptional abilities.
Did I misread that?
>>JAWER: Well I
guess what I'm saying
is that dissociation, which
is sort of part and parcel
with trauma,
dissociation plays a role
in a lot of these kinds
of anomalous phenomena,
because the feelings
sort of go Underground
>>REGINA: I see.
>>JAWER: But my perspective
on it is that the people--
you wouldn't have anomalous
occurrences without people.
And you wouldn't have
them without feelings
that have basically
gone underground,
like that kind of PTSD.
And those are the
feelings that somehow
get extended into the
environment and in a sense
take on a life of their own.
>>REGINA: I'm going to
throw this quote out there,
and then we're
going to start going
into some of these incidences.
Just because I love the quote
and it's in your book, right?
OK, because we're
all thinking, oh, I'm
thicker or thinner skinned than
this person or that, whatnot.
And then when you consider
this quote in terms of what's
normal, we're all thick.
OK?
And this is from Douglas Adams.
He says, "The fact that we live
at the bottom of a deep gravity
well on the surface of
a gas covered planet
going around a nuclear
fireball 90 million miles away
and think this is
normal is obviously
some indication of how skewed
our perspective of normal
tends to be."
[LAUGHING] So what
is normal anyway
that we're even surviving
here in this environment.
So let's go ahead and look at--
I didn't see his
name in the book.
It was the son of the
psychologist Joseph Pearce,
what happened to him at
five when he launched
into that 20-minute lecture.
OK?
So set it up.
>>JAWER: Yes.
So there are some
kids that seem to have
a preternatural
intelligence or ability.
It's most closely associated
with child prodigies.
He stunned his father.
His father was
teaching, I think,
a college course
and was preparing
to go off to work that morning.
And his son sort of
lectured him and used
words that were just
not in the vocabulary
of a typical five-year-old.
>>REGINA: Well about the
subject of God and man.
>>JAWER: Yes, very
profound subjects.
And he was expounding about
God, and truth, and the word
of being, and so forth.
And his father
didn't understand it.
But I think he says in the
book that just this realization
dawned on him that something
amazing was happening.
Kind of a feeling right
up his spine like this
is just not ordinary.
>>REGINA: Not normal.
Yeah.
>>JAWER: Yeah, yeah,
but it is very human.
And the question is,
where does it come from?
>>REGINA: Well that's
the interesting part.
And there's a lot of
conjecture around that.
One of the things
you said in the book
is that the son's
eyes appeared--
he was in a very monotone
voice, and his eyes
appeared to just be very
still, almost glossed over
as he was allowing
this information
to flow through him.
Now if you turn to metaphysical
or you turn to religious sects,
they're going to say,
well, someone was speaking
through him, not of him.
So how would you
respond to that?
Because with our
audience a lot of people
are going to say the guy
was channeling, right?
>>JAWER: Right, right.
And I'd bring up the
term dissociation again.
Because whenever somebody
is sort of distant
from themselves, which--
you mentioned trauma
before, that's why
I said dissociation is
part and parcel of trauma,
people lose their
sense of themselves.
And they don't feel things
as they typically do.
And in all cases where
you have mediums--
>>REGINA: Yeah, can
that leave them open?
>>JAWER: They are dissociating
from their own day-to-day
experience.
And the question is
what are they accessing?
>>REGINA: What are
they accessing?
Exactly.
>>JAWER: And it's hard to say
because, Regina, certainly
there are authors of
terrific works of fiction
who develop so many different
kinds of characters.
And they will say that when
they sit down to write--
>>REGINA: It just shows up.
>>JAWER: --it just shows up.
And they don't know
how they're coming up
with this incredible
creativity, but they come up
with very distinct characters.
And they don't know
where the story is going.
>>REGINA: It's like they're
literally just transcribing
something.
>>JAWER: They feel that
the muse is guiding them
and they are just the vessel.
>>REGINA: I mean
with someone who's
five to give a 20-minute
discourse on the nature of God
and man, it would
certainly seem it's not
coming from his personal
experience at this point.
It is coming from
something somewhere.
Yeah.
>>JAWER: Yeah.
And what I look
at in the book is
the process of possible prenatal
precursor to what's happening.
Because what I
sort of alighted on
is that in many cases
of child prodigies,
and they display these
kinds of uncanny abilities.
And recollections,
they have recollections
of being in utero.
And they have,
apparently, recollections
of somebody else's
life in some cases.
So where does that come from?
What I noticed is that
in many of these cases,
there was some issue
during the pregnancy.
In some cases, the mother
suffered a severe shock.
There was an accident.
In one case that's
mentioned in the book,
the husband and wife came
home when she was pregnant
and they found people that were
breaking into their home, which
was scary.
There's also conditions
like preeclampsia,
which is apparently
something that can
affect the pregnancy adversely.
And premature births as
well and difficult births.
>>REGINA: So let's say you've
had a challenging birth
or you've had a
challenging gestation,
so what are you saying
this does to the being?
It creates more of a
dissociative pattern
or potential in them
that can essentially
allow for something
else to come in
and kind of claim that
space energetically?
>>JAWER: Something like that.
My guesstimate about this--
and it's sheer speculation--
but my guesstimate
is that there may be
something preceding this life.
Who knows what that is.
These kids, I believe, have
a closer connection to that
because the fact that
their gestation was not
the typical pattern, that there
was something that happened.
>>REGINA: They were shaken
out of their comfort.
>>JAWER: They were.
Something got shaken up and so
there's an echo, so to speak,
of what came before, that
there are traces of that.
And they generally
lose those traces
by about age six or seven.
But they're very evident in
some kids up to that point.
>>REGINA: Right, yes.
I mean reading
Carol Bowman's book,
you know Ian Stevenson's
research and all that
on children and past
lives-- and we're
going to get to something
in a moment that
could sound like that.
One thing you wrote
about is a lot of times--
and forgive me if I can't
remember if it was--
whether it was prodigies or
children with autism often
have--
I think it was prodigies
have a very difficult time
with injustice.
They're very sensitive
to injustice.
Talk about that for
just a second before we
go into some of
these other stories.
>>JAWER: Well one example might
actually be Greta Thunberg--
I think she's 16 or 17 now--
who's become the face crusading
against global warming.
She went into a funk
a few years ago.
Before she reemerged
from that funk
and started her school strike
for global climate change,
she seems to be a
highly sensitive kid.
>>REGINA: Clearly.
>>JAWER: Yes.
Now I don't know whether--
>>REGINA: Passionately.
>>JAWER: Very passionate.
And she does have
an Asperger's--
>>REGINA: High function autism.
>>JAWER: High functional autism.
She was diagnosed, I think, just
within the past three or four
years.
Her parents really did not know
what was going on with her.
But she went into
this depression
then she came out this crusader.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>JAWER: So again I'd
love to ask the family--
>>REGINA: What kind of
trauma cracked her open.
>>JAWER: --about her pregnancy,
or her mom's pregnancy
was like with her.
I would love to know that.
>>REGINA: Oh, well,
write to them.
I'm sure they'd be
happy to tell you.
This was one of my
favorites in the book.
So a little guy named Jay began
drawing pictures of cellos
at the age of two.
And he began playing
by the age of three.
No parental involvement
nor support,
they didn't play music.
He composed five symphonies
by the age of five.
People are thinking Beethoven
and so forth at this point,
right?
Talk about that
kind of phenomenon,
because I think that
really kind of pulls
on everybody's imagination
and heartstrings,
both to see a little person
just emerge with these talents.
>>JAWER: Yeah, that story
and many others in the book
come from a guy named
Darold Treffert, who
is probably the world's
foremost authority on prodigies.
He was the consultant
on the movie "Rain
Man" with Dustin Hoffman.
And Dustin Hoffman,
by the way, played
a savant, an autistic savant,
not a prodigy, but a savant,
had this amazing capability
of almost instantaneous
memorization of everything.
>>REGINA: He knew what
the rain was 10 years ago
on a certain day.
He knew what the weather
patterns were in a given area.
It was an insane
amount of knowledge.
>>JAWER: He was a
calendar calculator
and he could read things
independently with each eye.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah, so obviously
both of the hemispheres
were firing but independently
from each other.
Really interesting.
>>JAWER: His actual
name, the character
or the person that character
is based on his name
was named Kim Peek, Kim Peek.
But, yeah, there
are these instances
of incredible prodigies.
It raises many, many questions,
some very profound questions
about what it is to be--
>>REGINA: I'm really
comfortable with the notion
of continued cycles
of incarnation,
I think, well, sure.
You bring that one forward,
it's ready and loaded,
and all you have to do is
get in a little vehicle
and get some pencil, and
paper, and an instrument,
and you're ready to go.
>>JAWER: Yeah, we seem to be--
at least some of us have
access to vast potential.
And the question is--
and Darold Treffert
asks this is-- does everyone
have a little "Rain Man"
capacity within them?
That's an open question.
I mean people would
answer different ways.
But I think by looking
at these particular kinds
of exceptional kids and
other exceptional people,
we do have a sense
that maybe there
is a path from
birth and previous
that there's much more
knowledge and capability
than we could guess.
>>REGINA: Oh, I
think that's so true.
Humans are such an
interesting species.
This is one named Mariah.
This was apparent
past-life memory.
"Mariah was 2 and 1/2 years old.
She came to her teacher
sobbing, asking her
to help her find her children."
And she named the French
village that she was from.
She described even
her own death.
Talk about this
case a little bit.
This is truly amazing as far as
thin walls and sensitivity go.
>>JAWER: Yes, this comes
from a gifted and talented
organization and accounts
of these kinds of kids.
And I believe with
Mariah, she was weeping.
The teachers were
incredibly moved
because she cared so
much for these kids,
and she didn't know
where they were.
>>REGINA: Her kids.
>>JAWER: And it seemed to
be an accident on a wagon
or something like
that, as what I recall,
or a fire that took place.
I might be mixing up a
couple of these accounts.
But it's the emotion to
me that is paramount.
To her teachers, I remember
them saying it was her emotion.
It was the way
she cared so much.
And
>>REGINA: It was such a
visceral, real experience.
>>JAWER: It was such a visceral,
immediate experience for her.
And that's why I think
emotion is so critical.
So the subtitle of
"Sensitive Soul"
is "The Overlooked
Role of Emotion
in Extraordinary States."
And that's really what my
work overall is looking at
is the power of emotion.
And I believe I go so far as to
suggest that emotion is really
fundamentally what connects
us with one another,
with animals, with nature,
with whatever created us.
I would go so far as to suggest
that we live in a fundamentally
emotional universe.
So that these kinds
of experiences,
which are traumatic,
have a resonance to them.
And it tends to be
with these kids.
For example, kids that recount
past lives or someone else's
life.
It's been calculated that
of the many cases that
have been documented--
Ian Stevenson, you mentioned,
and his successor's
name Jim Tucker at the
University of Virginia.
They've done 2,500 cases
or something like this.
In 70% of them, they
involve some sort
of traumatic death or demise.
So it's the trauma and the
huge emotion that's riled up.
>>REGINA: And it's like
the emotion ties them back
into that experience,
because those experiences can
be validated in a
lot of these cases.
I remember a few of
them, and they're just
really exceptional
where they go up and say
that's the house I used to live
in and go knock on the door.
And their old wife is
there, who's old now.
They've been dead for a while.
And they know where
their pipe is.
>>JAWER: Yes, the
emotion seems to be
the magnet, the sort
of the glue that
holds the different details
of that recollection together.
And that's what I'm
most fascinated with
is the emotion, because we
all are emotional creatures.
But I tend to think emotion is
much more profound than it's
typically given credit.
>>REGINA: So let
me ask you this.
So in the case of Mariah looking
for her lost children so upset,
is that one of those
situations, then,
if you wanted to look at it this
way that's possible where she--
and you mentioned this earlier.
I think you alluded to it--
that she could also be
tapping into someone else's
field, someone else's emotions,
someone else's experience even?
>>JAWER: Yes, that's
entirely possible.
The term is telesomatic
experiences.
"Tele" as in distance.
"Telepathy" literally means
feeling at a distance.
Telesomatic is where
people actually feel,
literally, someone else's
pain at a distance.
So there are accounts of
these in the book as well.
And I'm sure you
and your viewers
are familiar with situations
where people feel uneasy.
Something's happened to someone
that they know and care about,
they can't quite put
their finger on it,
or maybe they can and they feel
a headache, or a stomach ache,
or they have to drop their
pen because their hand is just
completely pained.
There are these accounts.
And so it seems that emotion
can traverse time and distance.
And these telesomatic
experiences attest to that.
So it could be that that's
held in common, as you suggest,
with kids to have these
memories of someone else's life.
It's something that
happened some other time,
some other place, not
necessarily a reincarnation,
but they're picking
up on something.
>>REGINA: It could
be, but it may not be.
>>JAWER: It may be.
We don't know.
>>REGINA: OK.
And also ghosts.
Now you're starting to get over
into poltergeists and ghosts
as well.
You have a little
different perception on it.
And we talk about
Matthew Manning
because he had a poltergeist
situation with telekinesis.
Now this one's fascinating.
I've done some stories on
this phenomena including
the woman whose family
the movies "The Conjuring"
was based on and how
crazy it was at that home.
In Matthew's case, the furniture
would lift off the ground
and hurdle itself
through the air.
But then this is the
interesting part-- hundreds
of dead people's signatures
suddenly appeared on his wall
all in different handwriting.
And then he began
automatic writing
in fluent Chinese and Arabic.
So tell us about this guy.
>>JAWER: Yeah, and
he also, later on I
believe, he was able
to produce artwork
that was very reminiscent
of different English artists
from the 17th and
18th centuries.
So incredible,
incredible capabilities.
>>REGINA: So this guy's
wide open obviously,
but what about the poltergeist
and ghost aspect of it?
Because you have a
few of those in there,
we just don't have enough
time to go over all of them.
>>JAWER: Yeah, well
I'll mention something
that happened with me which
I think is relevant and again
came out of the blue.
I remember many years
ago, 20 some years,
I was late at night and
pacing back and forth.
And I was concerned and
agitated about something.
I don't remember what it was.
But there was a light
bulb in the socket
that was on the ceiling that
just dropped, just dropped out.
And that never happened
before, never happened after.
And the convergence
of the conjunction
with me being riled up got
me to thinking about this.
So again, I think that with
a poltergeist, phenomena
and apparitions as
well, in general ghosts,
I think that there are
feelings that somehow emanate
from someone, whether
that person is there
at that moment in that
particular location
or maybe they were
there some time before.
>>REGINA: Right.
And they're
electrically charged.
I mean the emotions
have a charge to them.
>>JAWER: We talk
about them that way--
this feeling is electric.
>>REGINA: Yeah, exactly.
Well in that situation too--
referring back to
Andrea Perron's book--
she said when these poltergeist
activities occurred--
which some of them were
pretty horrific by the way--
this one is just fascinating.
>>JAWER: This
didn't hurt anybody.
Some of them sometimes do.
>>REGINA: Those were
violent in her case,
especially going
after her mother.
But what happened
at the same time
is they had an old analog
electric meter would
start spinning out of control.
They'd have these
massive electric bills.
So whatever it was drawing--
whether it was an entity on
the other side or the entities
involved on this side and the
emotions that were getting
drawn into it, it was using a
tremendous, tremendous amount
of whatever ambient
electricity was around.
>>JAWER: Yeah.
>>REGINA: I'm thinking because
this guy with things moving,
furniture flying
through the house.
>>JAWER: Very, yes, hard to
conceive how that could happen.
There was a guy in England
in the 1980s, I believe,
who did a survey.
And he asked people about
anomalous experiences
that they'd had and
electrical sensitivity.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>JAWER: And a large
percentage of them
felt that they were
electrically sensitive,
which is what some of the
people told me way back when
I was investigating poor indoor
air quality in sick buildings
and some of these folks.
So there seems to be some sort
of overlap between emotion,
especially displaced,
dissociated feelings,
and the possibility
of them becoming
manifest in the environment
in these incredible ways that
may also borrow from
some form of electricity
to gain their momentum.
>>REGINA: It's fascinating.
I can say just quickly
on a personal level--
and then we'll wrap it
up here, because there's
so many more of these that
people can read in your book.
But I have a particular
condition I was born with.
And I remember this one doctor
that I go to was looking at me
and said I've never seen such
an electrical system, such
an active electrical system.
So what happens when I go into
these things, these crises,
you might call them
before passing out
or whatnot is I feel that all
the electricity is flying away
from my body.
That's how I would
actually describe it.
All the electricity is going.
And if there's
someone who knows how
to work with
electricity nearby, they
can cap the areas it escapes
our body and for all people.
And one of them is right here
at the base of the neck to trap
that in there so
it can't leak out.
And then it flies out my
fingers and everything.
But what I noticed is if
you control the emotions
and don't become
afraid at that time,
if I can control
my emotions, I can
stop the flow of the
electricity out of my body
and maybe not even
go unconscious.
But if I go into any fear at
all, the electricity flies away
and I'm out.
>>JAWER: Yes, and
that's been demonstrated
with some of the cases.
There's a guy named Bill Roll
who's probably the most famous
of the poltergeist
investigators.
And it's typically
children-- it can be adults,
but it's typically adolescents
or preadolescents that seem
to be the focus of these
poltergeist cases--
when they get
therapy and when they
are allowed to talk
about their feelings,
the intensity of the
phenomena is reduced.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Yeah, it is interesting.
It's an electrical universe.
We're electrical creatures.
We're working with thoughts
that have electrical components
to them as well.
And we're working with who
knows what just beyond the veil
and who knows what from
beyond time and space.
And so you're saying it sounds--
just to sum it up a
little bit before you
have your kind of final
thoughts on this--
that when we come into the
world in a more traumatic way
or suffer very early
trauma in our lives,
it creates a dissociation that
allows us to kind of almost
be open more to these
exceptional, what you
call exceptional situations,
or talents, or skills
in this life.
>>JAWER: Yes, it doesn't seem
to be a conscious choice.
That some people have it.
Other people can develop it.
But yes, that's essentially it.
And emotion being the key.
Again, I believe that feelings
have a profundity to them.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
They're giving us a
lot of information.
>>JAWER: They're physical.
They're mental.
They're spiritual.
And I think that
feelings combine
all of those aspects of us.
So we never want to
sell our feelings short.
>>REGINA: Never.
Because they're
directly emanating also,
I believe, from the
subconscious and everything
that's ever been and
ever happened within us.
And if you have a feeling,
it's because it's either
a warning, an invitation.
There's information in there.
And so you're right, we
shouldn't-- we should never
ignore our feelings.
And I appreciate your taking the
time to study this for decades
and write a book on it.
>>JAWER: Well three
books at this point.
>>REGINA: Yeah, three books.
Well the one we're talking
about "Sensitive Soul."
I appreciate that.
And now which website can they
go to take the little self-test
before we sign off?
>>JAWER: Sure I'll
mention two websites.
The self-test is
www.youremotionaltype.com.
>>REGINA: Youremotionaltype.com.
>>JAWER: And then for everything
else, it's michaeljawer.com.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Thank you so much,
Michael, for joining us.
Very interesting.
>>JAWER: My pleasure,
Regina, thank you.
>>REGINA: Michael
Jawer, "Sensitive Soul."
I hope this has given you
some interesting fodder
for conversations with
friends and family
about some of the experiences
you've had in life.
Again the book "Sensitive
Soul" by Michael Jawer.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]